doc/authentication.md, before:

Cockpit Authentication
======================

Cockpit authorizes users by looking at the Authorization header on requests
to /login. Cockpit will attempt to perform the start the authentication command that
is configured for the auth scheme contained in the header.

To configure an auth scheme add a section to cockpit.conf for that scheme. For example
to configure an command for the "Bearer" auth scheme your cockpit.conf should contain
the following section.

```
[bearer]
command = example-verify-token
timeout = 300
```

The command is then responsible to:

 * verify the given credentials
 * setup an appropriate session and environment based on those credentials
 * launch a bridge that speaks the cockpit protocol on stdin and stdout.

The default command is `cockpit-session` it is able to handle Password
(`[basic]`), Kerberos/GSSAPI (`[negotiate]`), and TLS client certificate
(`[tls-cert]`) authentication.

Authentication commands are called with a single argument which is the host that the user
is connecting to. They communicate with their parent process using the cockpit protocol on
stdin and stdout.

Instead of `Command`, it's also possible to specify `UnixPath` to connect to a unix socket at a
given path.  The protocol is the same.

Credentials can then be retrieved by issuing a authorize command with a challenge. The challenge
should correspond to the authorization type in header (ei: Basic or Bearer). For example:


```
{
    "command": "authorize",
    "cookie": "cookie",
    "challenge": "*"
}
```

The response will look something like this

```
{
    "command": "authorize",
    "cookie": "cookie",
    "response": "Basic dXNlcjpwYXNzd29yZAo=",
}
```

A `*` challenge requests whatever credentials the parent process has. Most auth
commands will want to begin by issuing a `*` challenge.

By default cockpit-ws will wait a maximum of 30 seconds to receive this response.
The number of seconds to wait can be adjusted by adding a timeout parameter along
side the auth schema configuration in your config file. The given value should be
a number between 1 and 900.

If more information is needed the command should respond with a `X-Conversation` challenge.
This takes the following format.

```
X-Conversation nonce base64(prompt message)
```

The message will be displayed to the user and the user will be prompted for a response.
If the user does not respond within 60 seconds the command will be closed and the login
aborted. The number of seconds to wait can be adjusted by adding a response-timeout parameter
along side the auth schema configuration in your config file. The given value should be a
number between 1 and 900.

Once a result is known a "init" command should be sent. If the login was successful you can usually
just let the bridge do this.

If the login was not successful the JSON should include a problem field. Values of
`authentication-failed`, `authentication-unavailable` or `access-denied`
are translated to the appropriate cockpit error codes. Any other values are treated
as generic errors. Additionally a message field may be included as well.

If an process exits without sending a init command, that will be treated as an internal error.

If the authentication command has additional data that it would like to return with a successful response
it can do so by sending a `x-login-data` challenge. The command should have an additional JSON field
`login-data`. The string placed there will be returned by along with a successful json response.

For a simple python example see
[cockpit-auth-ssh-key](https://github.com/cockpit-project/cockpit/blob/main/containers/ws/cockpit-auth-ssh-key).

Remote machines
---------------

Cockpit also supports logging directly into remote machines. The remote machine to
connect to is provided by using a application name that begins with `cockpit+=`.
The default command used for this is cockpit-ssh.

The section `SSH-Login` defines the options for all ssh commands. The section
has the same options as the other authentication sections with the following additions.

 * `host` The default host to log into. Defaults to 127.0.0.1.
 * `connectToUnknownHosts`. By default cockpit will refuse to connect to any machines that
 are not already present in ssh's global `known_hosts` file (usually
 `/etc/ssh/ssh_known_hosts`). Set this to `true` is to allow those connections
 to proceed.

This uses the [cockpit-ssh](https://github.com/cockpit-project/cockpit/tree/main/src/ssh)
bridge. After the user authentication with the `"*"` challenge, if the remote
host is not already present in any local `known_hosts` file, this will send an
`"x-host-key"` challenge:

```
{
    "command": "authorize",
    "challenge": "x-host-key"
    "cookie": "cookie",
}
```

The caller responds to that with either a valid key like below, or an empty
string response if there is no available key.

```
{
    "command": "authorize",
    "cookie": "cookie",
    "response": "ssh-rsa AAAA1234...",
}
```

Client certificate authentication
---------------------------------
When a machine is joined to an Identity Management domain (like
[FreeIPA](https://www.freeipa.org) or Active Directory) which has [client-side
user certificates](https://www.freeipa.org/page/V4/User_Certificates) set up,
then these can be enabled for authentication to Cockpit by setting this option
in cockpit.conf:

```
[WebService]
ClientCertAuthentication = yes
```

This uses the `[tls-cert]` authentication scheme.

When enabling this mode, other authentication types commonly get disabled. See
the next section for details.

See the [Certificate/smart card authentication guide](https://cockpit-project.org/guide/latest/cert-authentication.html)
for details how to set this up.

Actions
-------

Setting an action can modify the behavior for an auth scheme. Currently two actions
are supported.

 * **remote-login-ssh** Use the `SSH-Login` section instead.
 * **none** Disable this auth scheme.

To configure an action add the `action` option. For example to disable basic authentication,
cockpit.conf should contain the following section:

```
[basic]
action = none
```

Likewise, if the machine is part of a Kerberos domain, but that should not be used to
authenticate to cockpit, create the following section:

```
[negotiate]
action = none
```

Limits
------

Cockpit can be configured to limit the number of concurrent login processes. See cockpit.conf
for more details. This will affect how many custom authentication processes can be launched.

Environment Variables
---------------------

The following environment variables are set by cockpit-ws when spawning an auth process:

 * **COCKPIT_REMOTE_PEER** Set to the ip address of the connecting user.

The following environment variables are used to set options for the `cockpit-ssh` process:

 * **COCKPIT_SSH_CONNECT_TO_UNKNOWN_HOSTS** Set to `1` to  allow connecting to
   hosts that are not present in the current `known_hosts` files. If not set,
   Cockpit will only connect to unknown hosts if either the remote peer is
   local, or if the `Ssh-Login` section in `cockpit.conf` has an
   `connectToUnknownHosts` option set to a true value (`1`, `yes` or `true`).

 * **COCKPIT_SSH_KNOWN_HOSTS_FILE** Path to knownhost files. Defaults to
   `PACKAGE_SYSCONF_DIR/ssh/ssh_known_hosts`

 * **COCKPIT_SSH_BRIDGE_COMMAND** Command to launch after a ssh connection is
   established. Defaults to `cockpit-bridge` if not provided.

Commit message:

doc: Clean up Ssh-Login in authentication.md
Consistently spell the section "Ssh-Login". This makes it easier to
grep.

Document the current behaviour that the specified `host` will not have
its host key checked.

Fix indentation of the `connectToUnknownHosts` paragraph.

doc/authentication.md, after:

Cockpit Authentication
======================

Cockpit authorizes users by looking at the Authorization header on requests
to /login. Cockpit will attempt to perform the start the authentication command that
is configured for the auth scheme contained in the header.

To configure an auth scheme add a section to cockpit.conf for that scheme. For example
to configure an command for the "Bearer" auth scheme your cockpit.conf should contain
the following section.

```
[bearer]
command = example-verify-token
timeout = 300
```

The command is then responsible to:

 * verify the given credentials
 * setup an appropriate session and environment based on those credentials
 * launch a bridge that speaks the cockpit protocol on stdin and stdout.

The default command is `cockpit-session` it is able to handle Password
(`[basic]`), Kerberos/GSSAPI (`[negotiate]`), and TLS client certificate
(`[tls-cert]`) authentication.

Authentication commands are called with a single argument which is the host that the user
is connecting to. They communicate with their parent process using the cockpit protocol on
stdin and stdout.

Instead of `Command`, it's also possible to specify `UnixPath` to connect to a unix socket at a
given path.  The protocol is the same.

Credentials can then be retrieved by issuing a authorize command with a challenge. The challenge
should correspond to the authorization type in header (ei: Basic or Bearer). For example:


```
{
    "command": "authorize",
    "cookie": "cookie",
    "challenge": "*"
}
```

The response will look something like this

```
{
    "command": "authorize",
    "cookie": "cookie",
    "response": "Basic dXNlcjpwYXNzd29yZAo=",
}
```

A `*` challenge requests whatever credentials the parent process has. Most auth
commands will want to begin by issuing a `*` challenge.

By default cockpit-ws will wait a maximum of 30 seconds to receive this response.
The number of seconds to wait can be adjusted by adding a timeout parameter along
side the auth schema configuration in your config file. The given value should be
a number between 1 and 900.

If more information is needed the command should respond with a `X-Conversation` challenge.
This takes the following format.

```
X-Conversation nonce base64(prompt message)
```

The message will be displayed to the user and the user will be prompted for a response.
If the user does not respond within 60 seconds the command will be closed and the login
aborted. The number of seconds to wait can be adjusted by adding a response-timeout parameter
along side the auth schema configuration in your config file. The given value should be a
number between 1 and 900.

Once a result is known a "init" command should be sent. If the login was successful you can usually
just let the bridge do this.

If the login was not successful the JSON should include a problem field. Values of
`authentication-failed`, `authentication-unavailable` or `access-denied`
are translated to the appropriate cockpit error codes. Any other values are treated
as generic errors. Additionally a message field may be included as well.

If an process exits without sending a init command, that will be treated as an internal error.

If the authentication command has additional data that it would like to return with a successful response
it can do so by sending a `x-login-data` challenge. The command should have an additional JSON field
`login-data`. The string placed there will be returned by along with a successful json response.

For a simple python example see
[cockpit-auth-ssh-key](https://github.com/cockpit-project/cockpit/blob/main/containers/ws/cockpit-auth-ssh-key).

Remote machines
---------------

Cockpit also supports logging directly into remote machines. The remote machine to
connect to is provided by using a application name that begins with `cockpit+=`.
The default command used for this is cockpit-ssh.

The section `Ssh-Login` defines the options for all ssh commands. The section
has the same options as the other authentication sections with the following additions.

 * `host` The default host to log into. Defaults to 127.0.0.1. That host's key
   will not be checked/validated.
 * `connectToUnknownHosts`. By default cockpit will refuse to connect to any machines that
   are not already present in ssh's global `known_hosts` file (usually
   `/etc/ssh/ssh_known_hosts`). Set this to `true` is to allow those connections
   to proceed.

This uses the [cockpit-ssh](https://github.com/cockpit-project/cockpit/tree/main/src/ssh)
bridge. After the user authentication with the `"*"` challenge, if the remote
host is not already present in any local `known_hosts` file, this will send an
`"x-host-key"` challenge:

```
{
    "command": "authorize",
    "challenge": "x-host-key"
    "cookie": "cookie",
}
```

The caller responds to that with either a valid key like below, or an empty
string response if there is no available key.

```
{
    "command": "authorize",
    "cookie": "cookie",
    "response": "ssh-rsa AAAA1234...",
}
```

Client certificate authentication
---------------------------------
When a machine is joined to an Identity Management domain (like
[FreeIPA](https://www.freeipa.org) or Active Directory) which has [client-side
user certificates](https://www.freeipa.org/page/V4/User_Certificates) set up,
then these can be enabled for authentication to Cockpit by setting this option
in cockpit.conf:

```
[WebService]
ClientCertAuthentication = yes
```

This uses the `[tls-cert]` authentication scheme.

When enabling this mode, other authentication types commonly get disabled. See
the next section for details.

See the [Certificate/smart card authentication guide](https://cockpit-project.org/guide/latest/cert-authentication.html)
for details how to set this up.

Actions
-------

Setting an action can modify the behavior for an auth scheme. Currently two actions
are supported.

 * **remote-login-ssh** Use the `Ssh-Login` section instead.
 * **none** Disable this auth scheme.

To configure an action add the `action` option. For example to disable basic authentication,
cockpit.conf should contain the following section:

```
[basic]
action = none
```

Likewise, if the machine is part of a Kerberos domain, but that should not be used to
authenticate to cockpit, create the following section:

```
[negotiate]
action = none
```

Limits
------

Cockpit can be configured to limit the number of concurrent login processes. See cockpit.conf
for more details. This will affect how many custom authentication processes can be launched.

Environment Variables
---------------------

The following environment variables are set by cockpit-ws when spawning an auth process:

 * **COCKPIT_REMOTE_PEER** Set to the ip address of the connecting user.

The following environment variables are used to set options for the `cockpit-ssh` process:

 * **COCKPIT_SSH_CONNECT_TO_UNKNOWN_HOSTS** Set to `1` to  allow connecting to
   hosts that are not present in the current `known_hosts` files. If not set,
   Cockpit will only connect to unknown hosts if either the remote peer is
   local, or if the `Ssh-Login` section in `cockpit.conf` has an
   `connectToUnknownHosts` option set to a true value (`1`, `yes` or `true`).

 * **COCKPIT_SSH_KNOWN_HOSTS_FILE** Path to knownhost files. Defaults to
   `PACKAGE_SYSCONF_DIR/ssh/ssh_known_hosts`

 * **COCKPIT_SSH_BRIDGE_COMMAND** Command to launch after a ssh connection is
   established. Defaults to `cockpit-bridge` if not provided.
